WARD DOES NOT EXPLAIN HOW RESPONSES WERE COLLECTED - ESPECIALLY HOW NUMBER OF EXPERIENCES AND NUMBER OF COLORS EXPERIENCED ARE COLLECTED. DISCUSS WITH JANINA. ALSO DISCUSS IF 24 TRIALS, AND COLORED FILLER STIMULI, SHOULD BE USED LIKE WHAT BRAITHWAITE DID.

At the moment there are three routines in the experiment. It's probably better to just use one, and randomly select which stimulus to show (i. e. using lists of pattern names and accompanying sf/frequency specifications, changing pattern object's attributes, and saving the iteration's pattern in the output data) , if a setup like Braithwaite's should be used.


Evans, B. J. W., & Stevenson, S. J. (2008). The Pattern Glare Test: A review and determination of normative values. Ophthalmic and Physiological Optics, 28(4), 295–309. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1475-1313.2008.00578.x








Ward, J., Hoadley, C., Hughes, J. E. A., Smith, P., Allison, C., Baron-Cohen, S., & Simner, J. (2017). Atypical sensory sensitivity as a shared feature between synaesthesia and autism. Scientific Reports, 7, 41155. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep41155
"In the Pattern Glare Test, participants are shown black-and-white gratings of different spatial frequencies. People with high visual stress report being highly sensitive to mid-frequency gratings (2–5 cycles per degree at which contrast sensitivity is optimal)"
"The Pattern Glare Test used the same achromatic stimuli and same basic procedure as Braithwaite et al."
"The stimuli were presented for 5 seconds in a random order. Following each stimulus they were asked three questions. First, they were asked how many experiences they had to the stimulus by checking as many or as few options as they liked (colors, bending of lines, blurring of lines, shimmer/flicker, fading, shadowy shapes, other/specify). As in previous research, the total number of experiences reported is summed (i.e. a score of 0 to 7). The second question was specifically introduced because of our interest in color experiences and asked participants to report the colors that they experienced selecting as many or few as they liked (yellow, red, green, blue, purple, pink, brown, orange). The final question asked how uncomfortable they found it on an 11-point visual analogue scale with endpoints marked as “extremely uncomfortable” (left) and “extremely comfortable” (right)." DISCUSS WITH JANINA. ALSO DISCUSS IF 24 TRIALS, AND COLORED FILLER STIMULI, SHOULD BE USED LIKE WHAT BRAITHWAITE DID.


Braithwaite, J. J., Broglia, E., Brincat, O., Stapley, L., Wilkins, A. J., & Takahashi, C. (2013). Signs of increased cortical hyperexcitability selectively associated with spontaneous anomalous bodily experiences in a nonclinical population. Cognitive Neuropsychiatry, 18(6), 549–573.
"The present experiment employed the same computerised pattern-glare task as devised for previous investigations (Braithwaite et al., in press). The experiment was programmed in E-prime version 2.0 and was run in a dimly lit laboratory. There were three separate classes of pattern-glare stimuli (horizontally striped gratings) that differed in terms of their spatial frequency (SF) and their colour. The three separate spatial frequencies were (1) a low spatial frequency baseline grating (approx. 0.7 cpd), (2) a high spatial frequency baseline grating (approx. 11 cpd), and (3) the critical medium spatial frequency grating (approx. 3 cpd). All gratings were presented separately and centrally on a 17-inch LCD screen, and extended over an area of 110 mm wide􏰛115 mm high (13.175􏰛13.768 degrees of visual angle). Viewing distance was not fixed but was approximately 60 cm. Each separate spatial frequency occurred in either achromatic (black/white) or three separate chromatic combinations (red/green, mauve/purple, green/ blue). Previous research has suggested that effects of pattern glare can be stronger for achromatic stimuli and these were the main focus here. The chromatic stimuli were only used as filler stimuli to break up the presentation of the achromatic gratings and to prevent habituation to the repeated presentation of achromatic gratings. Each individual disc was presented twice*thus making a total block of 24 trials (two trials per grating, including filler stimuli, totalling eight trials per spatial frequency). Every trial followed exactly the same presentation procedure.
A trial began with the presentation of one of the pattern-glare gratings (chosen randomly). Participants were instructed to concentrate on a small fixation dot in the middle of the disc for approximately 5 s before proceeding with their responses. Accompanying the disc was an initial question (presented on the computer screen) on how visually ‘‘comfortable’’ the pattern was to look at (on a full scale of 􏰜5 􏰝‘‘extremely uncomfortable’’, 0 􏰝‘‘neither comfortable nor uncomfortable’’, and 􏰞5 􏰝‘‘extremely com- fortable’’). Participants rated the stimuli by moving the mouse cursor over the appropriate number and clicking on a button to proceed to the next question. This was followed by another question asking about any associated visual phenomena that may have occurred during the viewing of the pattern. A number of options were provided (i.e., shimmering, flickering, blur, shadows, bending of lines, nausea, pain, coloured halos, etc.; see Braithwaite et al., in press) and participants could click on as many options as they required before clicking on the option to continue to the next question.2 Finally, participants were asked whether or not any visual illusory effects occurred in one visual field (LVF/RVF), both visual fields equally, or neither visual field.
Participants were instructed that if the stimuli were too uncomfortable to look at then pressing the spacebar would remove the disc from view (but not the questions or response options). A further pressing of the spacebar would make it reappear and so on. As an additional measure of visual discomfort the number of spacebar presses was also recorded for each and every pattern- glare stimulus."







WHAT I'VE DONE:
Each pattern is of size 13.77 x 13.77 degrees. I used the greater degree reported by Braithwaite et al. Evans&Stevenson used 13.63 deg in their study and seem to consider their stimuli as circular, i. e. having the same width/height. I also made the assumption that the participant is sitting at a distance of 60cm from the monitor, like Braithwaite describe.
A line is drawn down the middle of the pattern - the **width/weight** of this is specified using pixels in PsychoPy unfortunately, so it has to be adjusted depending on the monitor used.
A small circle is drawn in the center of the pattern. Both the line and the circle are based on the stimuli images from Evans&Stevenson.
Pattern cycles per degree, in order of presentation:
pattern_1: 0.27 (this was chosen to create a stimulus as similar as possible to the image in Evans&Stevenson's article)
pattern_2: 3 (based on Braithwaite)
pattern_3: 11 (based on Braithwaite)
In Braithwaite et al.'s article, they presented the stimuli in the order pattern_1, pattern_3, pattern_2. This is different from what Evans&Stevenson describe, and Braithwaite et al. don't seem to explain why they changed the order of presentation. So I stuck with the original order from Evans&Stevenson. Ward however used a random order of presentation, so if Janina wants that this has to be changed.